---
id: 015
abbr: LCVR015
full_title: Local Civil Rule 1.5. Discipline of Attorneys
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 1.5
rule_title: Discipline of Attorneys
---

(a) Committee on Grievances. The Chief Judge shall appoint a committee of the Board
of Judges known as the Committee on Grievances, which under the direction of the Chief Judge
shall have charge of all matters relating to the discipline of attorneys. The Chief Judge shall
appoint a panel of attorneys who are members of the bar of this Court to advise or assist the
Committee on Grievances. At the direction of the Committee on Grievances or its chair, members
of this panel of attorneys may investigate complaints, may prepare and support statements of
charges, or may serve as members of hearing panels.

(b) Grounds for Discipline or Other Relief. Discipline or other relief, of the types set
forth in paragraph (c) below, may be imposed, by the Committee on Grievances, after notice and
opportunity to respond as set forth in paragraph (d) below, if any of the following grounds is found
by clear and convincing evidence:

  * (1) Any member of the bar of this Court has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor in any federal court, or in a court of any state or territory.
  * (2) Any member of the bar of this Court has been disciplined by any federal court
or by a court of any state or territory.
  * (3) Any member of the bar of this Court has resigned from the bar of any federal
court or of a court of any state or territory while an investigation into allegations of
misconduct by the attorney was pending.
  * (4) Any member of the bar of this Court has an infirmity which prevents the
attorney from engaging in the practice of law.
  * (5) In connection with activities in this Court, any attorney is found to have
engaged in conduct violative of the New York State Rules of Professional Conduct as 
adopted from time to time by the Appellate Divisions of the State of New York. In
interpreting the Code, in the absence of binding authority from the United States Supreme
Court or the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, this Court, in the
interests of comity and predictability, will give due regard to decisions of the New York
Court of Appeals and other New York State courts, absent significant federal interests.
  * (6) Any attorney not a member of the bar of this Court has appeared at the bar of
this Court without permission to do so.

(c) Types of Discipline or Other Relief.

  * (1) In the case of an attorney admitted to the bar of this Court, discipline imposed
pursuant to paragraph (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), or (b)(5) above may consist of a letter of
reprimand or admonition, censure, suspension, or an order striking the name of the attorney
from the roll of attorneys admitted to the bar of this Court.
  * (2) In the case of an attorney not admitted to the bar of this Court, discipline
imposed pursuant to paragraph (b)(5) or (b)(6) above may consist of a letter of reprimand or
admonition, censure, or an order precluding the attorney from again appearing at the bar of
this Court.
  * (3) Relief required pursuant to paragraph (b)(4) above shall consist of suspending
the attorney from practice before this Court.

(d) Procedure.

  * (1) If it appears that there exists a ground for discipline set forth in paragraph
(b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3), notice thereof shall be served by the Committee on Grievances upon
the attorney concerned by first class mail, directed to the address of the attorney as shown
on the rolls of this Court and to the last known address of the attorney (if any) as shown in 
the complaint and any materials submitted therewith. Service shall be deemed complete
upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph.
  * In all cases in which any federal court or a court of any state or territory has entered
an order disbarring or censuring an attorney or suspending the attorney from practice,
whether or not on consent, the notice shall be served together with an order by the Clerk of
this Court, to become effective twenty-four days after the date of service upon the attorney,
disbarring or censuring the attorney or suspending the attorney from practice in this Court
upon terms and conditions comparable to those set forth by the other court of record. In 
all cases in which an attorney has resigned from the bar of any federal court or of a court of
any state or territory while an investigation into allegations of misconduct by the attorney
was pending, even if the attorney remains admitted to the bar of any other court, the notice
shall be served together with an order entered by the Clerk for this Court, to become
effective twenty-four days after the date of service upon the attorney, deeming the attorney
to have resigned from the bar of this Court. Within twenty days of the date of service of
either order, the attorney may file a motion for modification or revocation of the order.
Any such motion shall set forth with specificity the facts and principles relied upon by the 
attorney as showing cause why a different disposition should be ordered by this Court.
The timely filing of such a motion will stay the effectiveness of the order until further order
by this Court. If good cause is shown to hold an evidentiary hearing, the Committee on
Grievances may direct such a hearing pursuant to paragraph (d)(4) below. If good cause is
not shown to hold an evidentiary hearing, the Committee on Grievances may proceed to
impose discipline or to take such other action as justice and this rule may require. If an
evidentiary hearing is held, the Committee may direct such interim relief pending the hearing 
as justice may require.
  * In all other cases, the notice shall be served together with an order by the Committee
on Grievances directing the attorney to show cause in writing why discipline should not be
imposed. If the attorney fails to respond in writing to the order to show cause, or if the
response fails to show good cause to hold an evidentiary hearing, the Committee on
Grievances may proceed to impose discipline or to take such other action as justice and this
rule may require. If good cause is shown to hold an evidentiary hearing, the Committee on
Grievances may direct such a hearing pursuant to paragraph (d)(4) below. If an evidentiary
hearing is held, the Committee may direct such interim relief pending the hearing as justice
may require.
  * (2) In the case of a ground for discipline set forth in paragraph (b)(2) or (b)(3)
above, discipline may be imposed unless the attorney concerned establishes by clear and
convincing evidence (i) that there was such an infirmity of proof of misconduct by the
attorney as to give rise to the clear conviction that this Court could not consistent with its
duty accept as final the conclusion of the other court, or (ii) that the procedure resulting in
the investigation or discipline of the attorney by the other court was so lacking in notice or
opportunity to be heard as to constitute a deprivation of due process, or (iii) that the
imposition of discipline by this Court would result in grave injustice.
  * (3) Complaints in writing alleging any ground for discipline or other relief set forth
in paragraph (b) above shall be directed to the Chief Judge, who shall refer such complaints
to the Committee on Grievances. The Committee on Grievances, by its chair, may
designate an attorney, who may be selected from the panel of attorneys established pursuant
to paragraph (a) above, to investigate the complaint, if it deems investigation necessary or
warranted, and to prepare a statement of charges, if the Committee deems that necessary or
warranted. Complaints, and any files based on them, shall be treated as confidential unless 
otherwise ordered by the Chief Judge for good cause shown.
  * (4) A statement of charges alleging a ground for discipline or other relief set forth
in paragraph (b)(4), (b)(5), or (b)(6) shall be served upon the attorney concerned by certified
mail, return receipt requested, directed to the address of the attorney as shown on the rolls
of this Court and to the last known address of the attorney (if any) as shown in the
complaint and any materials submitted therewith, together with an order by the Committee
on Grievances directing the attorney to show cause in writing why discipline or other relief 
should not be imposed. Upon the respondent attorney's answer to the charges the matter
will be designated by the Committee on Grievances for a prompt evidentiary hearing before
a Magistrate Judge of the Court or before a panel of three attorneys, who may be selected
from the panel of attorneys established pursuant to paragraph (a) above. The Magistrate
Judge or panel of attorneys conducting the hearing may grant such pre-hearing discovery as
they determine to be necessary, shall hear witnesses called by the attorney supporting the
charges and by the respondent attorney, and may consider such other evidence included in
the record of the hearing as they deem relevant and material. The Magistrate Judge or panel of attorneys conducting the hearing shall report their findings and recommendations in writing to the Committee on Grievances and shall serve them upon the respondent attorney and the attorney supporting the charges. After affording the respondent attorney and the attorney supporting the charges an opportunity to respond in writing to such report, or if no timely answer is made by the respondent attorney, or if the Committee on Grievances determines that the answer raises no issue requiring a hearing, the Committee on Grievances may proceed to impose discipline or to take such action as justice and this rule may require.

(e) Reinstatement. Any attorney who has been suspended or precluded from appearing
in this Court or whose name has been struck from the roll of the members of the bar of this Court
may apply in writing to the Chief Judge, for good cause shown, for the lifting of the suspension or
preclusion or for reinstatement to the rolls. The Chief Judge shall refer such application to the
Committee on Grievances. The Committee on Grievances may refer the application to a
Magistrate Judge or hearing panel of attorneys (who may be the same Magistrate Judge or panel of
attorneys who previously heard the matter) for findings and recommendations, or may act upon the
application without making such a referral. Absent extraordinary circumstances, no such
application will be granted unless the attorney seeking reinstatement meets the requirements for admission set forth in Local Civil Rule 1.3(a). 

(f) Remedies for Misconduct. The remedies provided by this rule are in addition to the
remedies available to individual District Judges and Magistrate Judges under applicable law with
respect to lawyers appearing before them. Individual District Judges and Magistrate Judges may
also refer any matter to the Chief Judge for referral to the Committee on Grievances to consider the
imposition of discipline or other relief pursuant to this rule.

(g) Notice to Other Courts. When an attorney is known to be admitted to practice in the
court of any state or territory, or in any other federal court, and has been convicted of any crime or
disbarred, precluded from appearing, suspended or censured in this court, the Clerk shall send to 
such other court or courts a certified or electronic copy of the judgment of conviction or order of
disbarment, preclusion, suspension or censure, a certified or electronic copy of the Court's opinion,
if any, and a statement of the attorney's last known office and residence address.

(h) Duty of Attorney to Report Discipline.

  * (1) In all cases in which any federal, state or territorial court, agency or tribunal has entered an order
disbarring or censuring an attorney admitted to the bar of this Court, or
suspending the attorney from practice, whether or not on consent, the attorney shall deliver
a copy of said order to the Clerk of this Court within fourteen days after the entry of the
order.
  * (2) In all cases in which any member of the bar of this Court has resigned from the
bar of any federal, state or territorial court, agency or tribunal while an investigation into
allegations of misconduct against the attorney was pending, the attorney shall report such
resignation to the Clerk of this Court within fourteen days after the submission of the resignation.
  * (3) In all cases in which this Court has entered an order disbarring or censuring an
attorney, or suspending the attorney from practice, whether or not on consent, the attorney
shall deliver a copy of said order within fourteen days after the entry of the order to the clerk
of each federal, state or territorial court, agency and tribunal in which such attorney has been
admitted to practice.
  * (4) Any failure of an attorney to comply with the requirements of this Local Civil
Rule 1.5(h) shall constitute a basis for discipline of said attorney pursuant to Local Civil Rule
1.5(c).