---
id: 061
abbr: LCVR061
full_title: Local Civil Rule 6.1. Service and Filing of Motion Papers
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 6.1
rule_title: Service and Filing of Motion Papers
---

Except for letter-motions as permitted by Local Rule 7.1(d), and unless otherwise provided
by statute or rule, or by the Court in a Judge's Individual Practice or in a direction in a particular
case, upon any motion, the notice of motion, supporting affidavits, and memoranda shall be served
and filed as follows:

(a) On all motions and applications under Fed. R. Civ. P. 26 through 37 inclusive and
45(c)(3), (1) the notice of motion, supporting affidavits, and memoranda of law shall be served by
the moving party on all other parties that have appeared in the action, (2) any opposing affidavits and answering memoranda of law shall be served within seven days after service of the moving
papers, and (3) any reply affidavits and reply memoranda of law shall be served within two days after
service of the answering papers. In computing periods of days, refer to Fed. R. Civ. P. 6 and Local
Civil Rule 6.4.

(b) On all civil motions, petitions, and applications, other than those described in Rule
6.1(a), and other than petitions for writs of habeas corpus, (1) the notice of motion, supporting
affidavits, and memoranda of law shall be served by the moving party on all other parties that have
appeared in the action, (2) any opposing affidavits and answering memoranda shall be served within
fourteen days after service of the moving papers, and (3) any reply affidavits and memoranda of law
shall be served within seven days after service of the answering papers. In computing periods of
days, refer to Fed. R. Civ. P. 6 and Local Civil Rule 6.4.

(c) The parties and their attorneys shall only appear to argue the motion if so directed by
the Court by order or by a Judge's Individual Practice.

(d) No ex parte order, or order to show cause to bring on a motion, will be granted except
upon a clear and specific showing by affidavit of good and sufficient reasons why a procedure other
than by notice of motion is necessary, and stating whether a previous application for similar relief
has been made.