---
id: 121
abbr: LCVR121
full_title: Local Civil Rule 12.1 Notice to Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Rule 12 Motion Supported by Matters Outside the Pleadings
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 12.1
rule_title: Notice to Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Rule 12 Motion Supported by Matters Outside the Pleadings
---

A represented party moving to dismiss or for judgment on the pleadings against a party
proceeding pro se, who refers in support of the motion to matters outside the pleadings as described in
Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b) or 12(c), shall serve and file the following notice with the full text of Fed. R. Civ.
P. 56 attached at the time the motion is served. If the Court rules that a motion to dismiss or for
judgment on the pleadings will be treated as one for summary judgment pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 56,
and the movant has not previously served and filed the notice required by this rule, the movant shall
amend the form notice to reflect that fact and shall serve and file the amended notice within fourteen days of the Court's ruling.

__Notice to Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Rule 12 Motion Supported by Matters Outside the
Pleadings__

The defendant in this case has moved to dismiss or for judgment on the pleadings pursuant to
Rule 12(b) or 12(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and has submitted additional written
materials. This means that the defendant has asked the Court to decide this case without a trial,
based on these written materials. You are warned that the Court may treat this motion as a motion
for summary judgment under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. For this reason, THE
CLAIMS YOU ASSERT IN YOUR COMPLAINT MAY BE DISMISSED WITHOUT A TRIAL IF
YOU DO NOT RESPOND TO THIS MOTION ON TIME by filing sworn affidavits as required by Rule 56(c) and/or other documents. The full text of Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
is attached.

In short, Rule 56 provides that you may NOT oppose the defendant's motion simply by relying
upon the allegations in your complaint. Rather, you must submit evidence, such as witness
statements or documents, countering the facts asserted by the defendant and raising specific facts that support your claim. If you have proof of your claim, now is the time to submit it. Any witness
statements must be in the form of affidavits. An affidavit is a sworn statement of fact based on
personal knowledge stating facts that would be admissible in evidence at trial. You may submit your
own affidavit and/or the affidavits of others. You may submit affidavits that were prepared
specifically in response to defendant's motion.

If you do not respond to the motion on time with affidavits and/or documents contradicting
the facts asserted by the defendant, the Court may accept defendant's facts as true. Your case may be
dismissed and judgment may be entered in defendant's favor without a trial.
If you have any questions, you may direct them to the Pro Se Office.