---
id: 263
abbr: LCVR263
full_title: Local Civil Rule 26.3 Uniform Definitions in Discovery Requests
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 26.3
rule_title: Uniform Definitions in Discovery Requests
---

(a) The full text of the definitions and rules of construction set forth in paragraphs (c) and (d)
is deemed incorporated by reference into all discovery requests. No discovery request shall use
broader definitions or rules of construction than those set forth in paragraphs (c) and (d). This rule
shall not preclude (1) the definition of other terms specific to the particular litigation, (2) the use of
abbreviations, or (3) a more narrow definition of a term defined in paragraph (c).

(b) This rule is not intended to broaden or narrow the scope of discovery permitted by the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

(c) The following definitions apply to all discovery requests:

  * (1) __Communication.__ The term “communication” means the transmittal of
information (in the form of facts, ideas, inquiries or otherwise).
  * (2) __Document.__ The term “document” is defined to be synonymous in meaning
and equal in scope to the usage of the term “documents or electronically stored information”
in Fed. R. Civ. P. 34(a)(1)(A). A draft or non-identical copy is a separate document within the
meaning of this term. 
  * (3) __Identify (with respect to persons).__ When referring to a person, “to identify”
means to give, to the extent known, the person's full name, present or last known address, and
when referring to a natural person, additionally, the present or last known place of
employment. Once a person has been identified in accordance with this subparagraph, only
the name of that person need be listed in response to subsequent discovery requesting the
identification of that person.
  * (4) __Identify (with respect to documents).__ When referring to documents, “to
identify” means to give, to the extent known, the (i) type of document; (ii) general subject 
matter; (iii) date of the document; and (iv) author(s), addressee(s) and recipient(s). In the
alternative, the responding party may produce the documents, together with identifying
information sufficient to satisfy Fed. R. Civ. P. 33(d).
  * (5) __Parties.__ The terms “plaintiff” and “defendant” as well as a party's full or
abbreviated name or a pronoun referring to a party mean the party and, where applicable, its
officers, directors, employees, partners, corporate parent, subsidiaries or affiliates. This
definition is not intended to impose a discovery obligation on any person who is not a party to
the litigation. 
  * (6) __Person.__ The term “person” is defined as any natural person or any legal entity,
including, without limitation, any business or governmental entity or association.
  * (7) __Concerning.__ The term “concerning” means relating to, referring to, describing,
evidencing or constituting.

(d) The following rules of construction apply to all discovery requests:

  * (1) __All/Any/Each.__ The terms “all,” “any,” and “each” shall each be construed as
encompassing any and all.
  * (2) __And/Or.__ The connectives “and” and “or” shall be construed either disjunctively
or conjunctively as necessary to bring within the scope of the discovery request all responses
that might otherwise be construed to be outside of its scope.
  * (3) __Number.__ The use of the singular form of any word includes the plural and vice
versa.