---
id: 332
abbr: LCVR332
full_title: Local Civil Rule 33.2 Standard Discovery in Prisoner Pro Se Actions
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 33.2
rule_title: Standard Discovery in Prisoner Pro Se Actions
---

(a) This rule shall apply in any action commenced pro se in which the plaintiff's complaint
includes any claim described in paragraph (b) of this rule, in which the events alleged in the
complaint occurred while the plaintiff was in the custody of the New York State Department of
Corrections & Community Supervision, the Department of Correction of the City of New York, or any
other jail, prison or correctional facility operated by or for a city, county, municipal or other local
governmental entity (collectively, the “Department”). Defendants represented by the Office of the
Attorney General, the Office of the Corporation Counsel of the City of New York, or counsel for or
appointed by the Department responsible for the jail, prison or correctional facility (collectively, the
“Facility”), shall respond to the standing discovery requests adopted by the Court, in accordance with
the instructions and definitions set forth in the standing requests, unless otherwise ordered by the
Court.

(b) The claims to which the standard discovery requests shall apply are Use of Force Cases,
Inmate Against Inmate Assault Cases and Disciplinary Due Process Cases, as defined below.

  * (1) “Use of Force Case” refers to an action in which the complaint alleges that an
employee of the Department or Facility used physical force against the plaintiff in violation of
the plaintiff's rights.
  * (2) “Inmate against Inmate Assault Case” refers to an action in which the complaint
alleges that an employee of the Department or Facility was responsible for the plaintiff's injury
resulting from physical contact with another inmate.
  * (3) “Disciplinary Due Process Case” refers to an action in which (i) the complaint
alleges that an employee of the Department or Facility violated or permitted the violation of a
right or rights in a disciplinary proceeding against plaintiff, and (ii) the punishment imposed
upon plaintiff as a result of that proceeding was placement in a special housing unit for more
than 30 days.

(c) If a response to the requests is required to be made on behalf of an individual defendant
represented by the Office of the Corporation Counsel, the Office of the Attorney General or counsel for
or appointed by the Department responsible for the Facility, it shall be made on the basis of
information and documents within the possession, custody or control of the Department or Facility in
accordance with the instructions contained in the requests. If no defendant is represented by such
counsel, responses based upon such information need not be made pursuant to this Local Rule,
without prejudice to such other discovery procedures as the plaintiff shall initiate.

(d) The requests, denominated “Plaintiff's Local Civil Rule 33.2 Interrogatories and
Requests for Production of Documents,” shall be answered within 120 days of service of the
complaint on any named defendant except (i) as otherwise ordered by the Court, for good cause
shown, which shall be based upon the facts and procedural status of the particular case and not upon a
generalized claim of burden, expense or relevance or (ii) if a dispositive motion is pending. The
responses to the requests shall be served upon the plaintiff. Copies of the requests are available from the
Court, including the Court's website.

(e) Except upon permission of the Court, for good cause shown, the requests shall constitute the
sole form of discovery available to plaintiff during the 120-day period designated above.

(f) If the Clerk's Office determines that this rule applies, it shall provide copies of the
standard requests for service upon defendants together with the summons and complaint.