---
id: 541
abbr: LCVR541
full_title: Local Civil Rule 54.1 Taxable Costs
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 54.1
rule_title: Taxable Costs
---

(a) __Notice of Taxation of Costs.__ Within thirty (30) days after the entry of final judgment,
or, in the case of an appeal by any party, within thirty (30) days after the final disposition of the
appeal, unless this period is extended by the Court for good cause shown, any party seeking to
recover costs shall file with the Clerk a notice of taxation of costs by Electronic Case Filing, except a
pro se party may do so in writing, indicating the date and time of taxation which shall comply with
the notice period prescribed by Fed. R. Civ. P. 54, and annexing a bill of costs. Costs will not be
taxed during the pendency of any appeal, motion for reconsideration, or motion for a new trial. 
Within thirty (30) days after the determination of any appeal, motion for reconsideration, or motion
for a new trial, the party seeking tax costs shall file a new notice of taxation of costs. Any party failing
to file a notice of taxation of costs within the applicable thirty (30) day period will be deemed to have
waived costs. The bill of costs shall include an affidavit that the costs claimed are allowable by law,
are correctly stated and were necessarily incurred. Bills for the costs claimed shall be attached as
exhibits.

(b) __Objections to Bill of Costs.__ A party objecting to any cost item shall serve objections
by Electronic Case Filing, except a pro se party may do so in writing, prior to the date and time
scheduled for taxation. The parties need not appear at the date and time scheduled for taxation
unless requested by the Clerk. The Clerk will proceed to tax costs at the time scheduled and allow
such items as are properly taxable. In the absence of written objection, any item listed may be taxed
within the discretion of the Clerk.

(c) __Items Taxable as Costs__

  * (1) __Transcripts.__ The cost of any part of the original trial transcript that was
necessarily obtained for use in this Court or on appeal is taxable. Convenience of counsel is
not sufficient. The cost of a transcript of Court proceedings prior to or subsequent to trial
is taxable only when authorized in advance or ordered by the Court.
  * (2) __Depositions.__ Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, the original transcript of
a deposition, plus one copy, is taxable if the deposition was used or received in evidence at
the trial, whether or not it was read in its entirety. Costs for depositions are also taxable if
they were used by the Court in ruling on a motion for summary judgment or other dispositive
substantive motion. Costs for depositions taken solely for discovery are not taxable.
Counsel's fees and expenses in attending the taking of a deposition are not taxable except as
provided by statute, rule (including Local Civil Rule 30.1), or order of the Court. Fees,
mileage, and subsistence for the witness at the deposition are taxable at the same rates as for
attendance at trial if the deposition taken was used or received in evidence at the trial.
  * (3) __Witness Fees, Travel Expenses and Subsistence.__ Witness fees and travel
expenses authorized by 28 U.S.C. § 1821 are taxable if the witness testifies. Subsistence
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1821 is taxable if the witness testifies and it is not practical for the
witness to return to his or her residence from day to day. No party to the action may
receive witness fees, travel expenses, or subsistence. Fees for expert witnesses are taxable
only to the extent of fees for ordinary witnesses unless prior court approval was obtained.
  * (4) __Interpreting Costs.__ The reasonable fee of a competent interpreter is taxable if
the fee of the witness involved is taxable. 
  * (5) __Exemplifications and Copies of Papers.__ A copy of an exhibit is taxable if the
original was not available and the copy was used or received in evidence. The cost of copies
used for the convenience of counsel or the Court are not taxable. The fees for a search and
certification or proof of the non-existence of a document in a public office is taxable.
  * (6) __Maps, Charts, Models, Photographs and Summaries.__ The cost of
photographs, 8” x 10” in size or less, is taxable if used or received in evidence.
Enlargements greater than 8” x 10” are not taxable except by order of the Court. Costs of
maps, charts, and models, including computer generated models, are not taxable except by
order of the Court. The cost of compiling summaries, statistical comparisons and reports is 
not taxable.
  * (7) __Attorney Fees and Related Costs.__ Attorney fees and disbursements and other
related fees and paralegal expenses are not taxable except by order of the Court. A motion
for attorney fees and related nontaxable expenses shall be made within the time period
prescribed by Fed. R. Civ. P. 54.
  * (8) __Fees of Masters, Receivers, Commissioners and Court Appointed Experts.__
Fees of masters, receivers, commissioners, and Court appointed experts are taxable as costs, 
unless otherwise ordered by the Court.
  * (9) __Costs for Title Searches.__ A party is entitled to tax necessary disbursements for
the expenses of searches made by title insurance, abstract or searching companies.
  * (10) __Docket and Miscellaneous Fees.__ Docket fees, and the reasonable and actual
fees of the Clerk and of a marshal, sheriff, and process server, are taxable unless otherwise
ordered by the Court.