---
id: 562
abbr: LCVR562
full_title: Local Civil Rule 56.2 Notice to Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Summary Judgment
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 56.2
rule_title: Notice to Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Summary Judgment
---

Any represented party moving for summary judgment against a party proceeding pro se shall
serve and file as a separate document, together with the papers in support of the motion, the
following “Notice To Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Motion For Summary Judgment” with the full
texts of Fed. R. Civ. P. 56 and Local Civil Rule 56.1 attached. Where the pro se party is not the
plaintiff, the movant shall amend the form notice as necessary to reflect that fact.

__Notice To Pro Se Litigant Who Opposes a Motion For Summary Judgment__

The defendant in this case has moved for summary judgment pursuant to Rule 56 of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. This means that the defendant has asked the Court to decide this
case without a trial, based on written materials, including affidavits, submitted in support of the
motion. THE CLAIMS YOU ASSERT IN YOUR COMPLAINT MAY BE DISMISSED
WITHOUT A TRIAL IF YOU DO NOT RESPOND TO THIS MOTION ON TIME by filing
sworn affidavits and/or other documents as required by Rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure and by Local Civil Rule 56.1. The full text of Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure and Local Civil Rule 56.1 is attached.

In short, Rule 56 provides that you may NOT oppose summary judgment simply by relying
upon the allegations in your complaint. Rather, you must submit evidence, such as witness
statements or documents, countering the facts asserted by the defendant and raising specific facts
that support your claim. If you have proof of your claim, now is the time to submit it. Any
witness statements must be in the form of affidavits. An affidavit is a sworn statement of fact based
on personal knowledge stating facts that would be admissible in evidence at trial. You may submit
your own affidavit and/or the affidavits of others. You may submit affidavits that were prepared
specifically in response to defendant's motion for summary judgment.

If you do not respond to the motion for summary judgment on time with affidavits and/or
documents contradicting the material facts asserted by the defendant, the Court may accept
defendant's facts as true. Your case may be dismissed and judgment may be entered in defendant's
favor without a trial.

If you have any questions, you may direct them to the Pro Se Office.

###Local Civil Rule 58.1. Remand by an Appellate Court
Any mandate, order, or judgment of an appellate court, when filed in the office of the Clerk
of the District Court, shall automatically become the order or judgment of the District Court and be
entered as such by the Clerk without further order, except if such mandate, order, or judgment of the
appellate court requires further proceedings in the District Court other than a new trial, an order shall
be entered making the order or judgment of the appellate court the order or judgment of the District
Court.