---
id: 6511
abbr: LCVR6511
full_title: Local Civil Rule 65.1.1. Sureties
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 65.1.1
rule_title: Sureties
---

(a) Whenever a bond, undertaking or stipulation is required, it shall be sufficient, except as
otherwise prescribed by law, if the instrument is executed by the surety or sureties only.

(b) Except as otherwise provided by law, every bond, undertaking or stipulation must be
secured by: (1) the deposit of cash or government bonds in the amount of the bond, undertaking or
stipulation; or (2) the undertaking or guaranty of a corporate surety holding a certificate of authority
from the Secretary of the Treasury; or (3) the undertaking or guaranty of two individual residents of
the district in which the case is pending, each of whom owns real or personal property within the
district worth double the amount of the bond, undertaking or stipulation, over all his or her debts 
and liabilities, and over all obligations assumed by said surety on other bonds, undertakings or
stipulations, and exclusive of all legal exemptions.

(c) Except as otherwise provided by law, all bonds, undertakings and stipulations of
corporate sureties holding certificates of authority from the Secretary of the Treasury, where the
amount of such bonds or undertakings has been fixed by a Judge or by court rule or statute, may be
approved by the Clerk.

(d) In the case of a bond, or undertaking, or stipulation executed by individual sureties, each
surety shall attach the surety's affidavit of justification, giving the surety's full name, occupation,
residence and business addresses, and showing that the surety is qualified as an individual surety
under paragraph (b) of this rule.

(e) Members of the bar who have appeared in the case shall not act as a surety in the case.
Administrative officers and employees of the Court, the marshal, and the marshal's deputies and
assistants, shall not act as a surety in any suit, action or proceeding pending in this Court.

(f) Whenever a notice of motion to enforce the liability of a surety upon a bond is served
upon the Clerk pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 65.1 or Fed. R. App. P. 8(b), the party making such
motion shall deposit with the clerk the original, three copies, and one additional copy for each surety
to be served.