---
id: 836
abbr: LCVR836
full_title: Local Civil Rule 83.6. Contempt Proceedings in Civil Cases [formerly Local Civil Rule 83.9]
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 83.6
rule_title: Contempt Proceedings in Civil Cases
---

(a) A proceeding to adjudicate a person in civil contempt, including a case provided for in
Fed. R. Civ. P. 37(b)(1) and 37(b)(2)(A)(vii), shall be commenced by the service of a notice of motion
or order to show cause. The affidavit upon which such notice of motion or order to show cause is
based shall set out with particularity the misconduct complained of, the claim, if any, for damages
occasioned thereby and such evidence as to the amount of damages as may be available to the
moving party. A reasonable counsel fee, necessitated by the contempt proceedings, may be
included as an item of damage. Where the alleged contemnor has appeared in the action by an
attorney, the notice of motion or order to show cause and the papers upon which it is based may be
served upon said attorney; otherwise service shall be made personally, together with a copy of this
Local Civil Rule 83.6, in the manner provided for by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the 
service of a summons. If an order to show cause is sought, such order may, upon necessity shown,
embody a direction to the United States marshal to arrest the alleged contemnor and hold such
person unless bail is posted in an amount fixed by the order, conditioned on the appearance of such
person in all further proceedings on the motion, and further conditioned that the alleged contemnor
will hold himself or herself amenable to all orders of the Court for surrender.

b) If the alleged contemnor puts in issue his or her alleged misconduct or the damages
thereby occasioned, said person shall upon demand be entitled to have oral evidence taken, either
before the Court or before a master appointed by the Court. When by law such alleged contemnor
is entitled to a trial by jury, said person shall make written demand before the beginning of the
hearing on the application; otherwise the alleged contemnor will be deemed to have waived a trial by
jury.

(c) If the alleged contemnor is found to be in contempt of court, an order shall be entered
(1) reciting or referring to the verdict or findings of fact upon which the adjudication is based; (2)
setting forth the amount of damages, if any, to which the complainant is entitled; (3) fixing the fine, if 
any, imposed by the Court, which fine shall include the damages found and naming the person to
whom such fine shall be payable; (4) stating any other conditions, the performance of which will
operate to purge the contempt; and (5) directing, where appropriate, the arrest of the contemnor by
the United States marshal and confinement until the performance of the condition fixed in the order
and the payment of the fine, or until the contemnor be otherwise discharged pursuant to law. A
certified copy of the order committing the contemnor shall be sufficient warrant to the marshal for
the arrest and confinement of the contemnor. The complainant shall also have the same remedies
against the property of the contemnor as if the order awarding the fine were a final judgment.

(d) If the alleged contemnor is found not guilty of the charges, said person shall be
discharged from the proceedings and, in the discretion of the Court, may have judgment against the
complainant for costs and disbursements and a reasonable counsel fee.