---
id: 837
abbr: LCVR837
full_title: Local Civil Rule 83.7. Court-Annexed Arbitration (Eastern District Only) [formerly Local Civil Rule 83.10]
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 83.7
rule_title: Court-Annexed Arbitration (Eastern District Only)
---

(a) __Certification of Arbitrators.__

  * (1) The Chief Judge or a Judge or Judges authorized by the Chief Judge to act
(hereafter referred to as the certifying Judge) shall certify as many arbitrators as may be
determined to be necessary under this rule.
  * (2) An individual may be certified to serve as an arbitrator if he or she: 
    * (A) has been
for at least five years a member of the bar of the highest court of a state or the District of
Columbia, 
    * (B) is admitted to practice before this court, and (C) is determined by the certifying
Judge to be competent to perform the duties of an arbitrator.
  * (3) Each individual certified as an arbitrator shall take the oath or affirmation 
required by Title 28, U.S.C. § 453 before serving as an arbitrator.
  * (4) A list of all persons certified as arbitrators shall be maintained in the
Office of the Clerk.

(b) __Compensation and Expenses of Arbitrators.__ An arbitrator shall be compensated
$250 for services in each case. If an arbitration hearing is protracted, the certifying Judge may
entertain a petition for additional compensation. If a party requests three arbitrators then each
arbitrator shall be compensated $100 for service. The fees shall be paid by or pursuant to the order
of the Court subject to the limits set by the Judicial Conference of the United States.

(c) __Immunity of Arbitrators.__ Arbitrators shall be immune from liability or suit with
respect to their conduct as such to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law.

(d) __Civil Cases Eligible for Compulsory Arbitration.__

  * (1) The Clerk of Court shall, as to all cases filed after January 1, 1986, designate and
process for compulsory arbitration all civil cases (excluding social security cases, tax matters,
prisoners' civil rights cases and any action based on an alleged violation of a right secured by
the Constitution of the United States or if jurisdiction is based in whole or in part on Title 28,
U.S.C. § 1343) wherein money damages only are being sought in an amount not in excess of
$150,000.00 exclusive of interest and costs.
  * (2) The parties may by written stipulation agree that the Clerk of Court shall
designate and process for court-annexed arbitration any civil case that is not subject to
compulsory arbitration hereunder.
  * (3) For purposes of this Rule only, in all civil cases damages shall be presumed to be
not in excess of $150,000.00 exclusive of interest and costs, unless:
    * (A) Counsel for plaintiff, at the time of filing the complaint, or in the event of
the removal of a case from state court or transfer of a case from another district to
this Court, within thirty (30) days of the docketing of the case in this district, files a 
certification with the Court that the damages sought exceed $150,000.00, exclusive of
interest and costs; or
    * (B) Counsel for a defendant, at the time of filing a counterclaim or
cross-claim files a certification with the court that the damages sought by the
counter-claim or cross-claim exceed $150,000.00 exclusive of interest and costs.

(e) __Referral to Arbitration.__

  * (1) After an answer is filed in a case determined eligible for arbitration, the arbitration
clerk shall send a notice to counsel setting forth the date and time for the arbitration hearing.
The date of the arbitration hearing set forth in the notice shall be approximately four months
but in no event later than 120 days from the date the answer was filed, except that the
arbitration proceeding shall not, in the absence of the consent of the parties, commence until 
30 days after the disposition by the District Court of any motion to dismiss the complaint,
motion for judgment on the pleadings, motion to join necessary parties, or motion for
summary judgment, if the motion was filed during a time period specified by the District
Court. The 120-day and 30-day periods specified in the preceding sentence may be
modified by the court for good cause shown. The notice shall also advise counsel that they
may agree to an earlier date for the arbitration hearing provided the arbitration clerk is
notified with 30 days of the date of the notice. The notice shall also advise counsel that they
have 90 days to complete discovery unless the Judge to whom the case has been assigned orders a shorter or longer period for discovery. The Judge may refer the case to a Magistrate Judge for purposes of
discovery. In the event a third party has been brought into the action, this notice shall not
be sent until an answer has been filed by the third party.
  * (2) The Court shall, sua sponte, or on motion of a party, exempt any case from
arbitration in which the objectives of arbitration would not be realized
    * (A) because the case involves complex or novel issues,
    * (B) because legal issues predominate over factual issues, or
    * (C) for other good cause.
Application by a party for an exemption from compulsory arbitration shall be made by
written letter to the Court not exceeding three pages in length, outlining the basis for the
request and attaching relevant materials, which shall be submitted no later than 21 days after
receipt of the notice to counsel setting forth the date and time for the arbitration hearing.
Within four days of receiving such a letter, any opposing affected party may submit a
responsive letter not exceeding three pages attaching relevant materials.
  * (3) Cases not originally designated as eligible for compulsory arbitration, but which in
the discretion of the assigned Judge, are later found to qualify, may be referred to arbitration.
A U.S. District Judge or a U.S. Magistrate Judge, in cases that exceed the arbitration ceiling of
$150,000 exclusive of interest and costs, in their discretion, may suggest that the parties 
should consider arbitration. If the parties are agreeable, an appropriate consent form signed
by all parties or their representatives may be entered and filed in the case prior to scheduling
an arbitration hearing.
  * (4) The arbitration shall be held before one arbitrator unless a panel of three
arbitrators is requested by a party, in which case one of whom shall be designated as
chairperson of the panel. If the amount of controversy, exclusive of interest and costs, is
$5,000 or less, the arbitration shall be held before a single arbitrator. The arbitration panel
shall be chosen at random by the Clerk of the Court from the lawyers who have been duly
certified as arbitrators. The arbitration panel shall be scheduled to hear not more than three
cases.
  * (5) The Judge to whom the case has been assigned shall, 30 days prior to the date
scheduled for the arbitration hearing, sign an order setting forth the date and time of the
arbitration hearing and the names of the arbitrators designated to hear the case. If a party
has filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings, summary judgment or similar relief, the 
Judge shall not sign the order before ruling on the motion, but the filing of such a motion on
or after the date of the order shall not stay the arbitration unless the Judge so orders.
  * (6) Upon entry of the order designating the arbitrators, the arbitration clerk shall send
to each arbitrator a copy of all pleadings, including the order designating the arbitrators, and
the guidelines for arbitrators.
  * (7) Persons selected to be arbitrators shall be disqualified for bias or prejudice as
provided in Title 28, U.S.C. § 144, and shall disqualify themselves in any action which they
would be required under title 28, U.S.C. § 455 to disqualify themselves if they were a justice,
judge, or magistrate.

(f) __Arbitration Hearing.__

  * (1) The arbitration hearing shall take place in the United States Courthouse in a
courtroom assigned by the arbitration clerk on the date and at the time set forth in the order
of the Court. The arbitrators are authorized to change the date and time of the hearing
provided the hearing is commenced within 30 days of the hearing date set forth in the order 
of the Court. Any continuance beyond this 30 day period must be approved by the Judge to
whom the case has been assigned. The arbitration clerk must be notified immediately of any
continuance.
  * (2) Counsel for the parties shall report settlement of the case to the arbitration clerk
and all members of the arbitration panel assigned to the case.
  * (3) The arbitration hearing may proceed in the absence of any party who, after notice,
fails to be present. In the event, however, that a party fails to participate in the arbitration
process in a meaningful manner, the Court may impose appropriate sanctions, including, but
not limited to, the striking of any demand for a trial de novo filed by that party.
  * (4) Rule 45 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply to subpoenas for
attendance of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence at an arbitration hearing
under this Rule. Testimony at an arbitration hearing shall be under oath or affirmation.
  * (5) The Federal Rules of Evidence shall be used as guides to the admissibility of
evidence. Copies or photographs of all exhibits, except those intended solely for
impeachment, must be marked for identification and delivered to adverse parties at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing. The arbitrators shall receive exhibits in evidence
without formal proof unless counsel has been notified at least seven (7) days prior to the
hearing that the adverse party intends to raise an issue concerning the authenticity of the
exhibit. The arbitrators may refuse to receive in evidence any exhibit, a copy or photograph
of which has not been delivered to the adverse party as provided herein.
  * (6) A party may have a recording and transcript made of the arbitration hearing, but
that party shall make all necessary arrangements and bear all expenses thereof.

(g) __Arbitration Award and Judgment.__

  * (1) The arbitration award shall be filed with the Court promptly after the hearing is
concluded and shall be entered as the judgment of the Court after the 30 day period for 
requesting a trial de novo pursuant to Section (h) has expired, unless a party has demanded a
trial de novo. The judgment so entered shall be subject to the same provisions of law and
shall have the same force and effect as a judgment of the Court in a civil action, except that it
shall not be appealable. In a case involving multiple claims and parties, any segregable part
of an arbitration award as to which an aggrieved party has not timely demanded a trial de
novo shall become part of the final judgment with the same force and effect as a judgment of
the Court in a civil action, except that it shall not be appealable.
  * (2) The contents of any arbitration award shall not be made known to any Judge who
might be assigned the case,
    * (A) except as necessary for the Court to determine whether to assess costs or
attorneys fees,
    * (B) until the District Court has entered final judgment in the action or the
action has been otherwise terminated, or
    * (C) except for purposes of preparing the report required by section 903(b) of
the Judicial Improvement and Access to Justice Act.
  * (3) Costs may be taxed as part of any arbitration award pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1920.

(h) __Trial De Novo.__

  * (1) Within 30 days after the arbitration award is entered on the docket, any party may
demand in writing a trial de novo in the District Court. Such demand shall be filed with the 
arbitration clerk, and served by the moving party upon all counsel of record or other parties.
Withdrawal of a demand for a trial de novo shall not reinstate the arbitrators' award and the
case shall proceed as if it had not been arbitrated.
  * (2) Upon demand for a trial de novo and the payment to the Clerk required by
paragraph (4) of this section, the action shall be placed on the calendar of the Court and
treated for all purposes as if it had not been referred to arbitration, and any right of trial by 
jury that a party would otherwise have shall be preserved inviolate.
  * (3) At the trial de novo, the Court shall not admit evidence that there had been an
arbitration proceeding, the nature or amount of the award, or any other matter concerning
the conduct of the arbitration proceeding.
  * (4) Upon making a demand for trial de novo the moving party shall, unless permitted
to proceed in forma pauperis, deposit with the Clerk of the Court an amount equal to the
arbitration fees of the arbitrators as provided in Section (b). The sum so deposited shall be
returned to the party demanding a trial de novo in the event that party obtains a final
judgment, exclusive of interest and costs, more favorable than the arbitration award. If the
party demanding a trial de novo does not obtain a more favorable result after trial or if the
Court determines that the party's conduct in seeking a trial de novo was in bad faith, the sum 
so deposited shall be paid by the Clerk to the Treasury of the United States.