---
id: 838
abbr: LCVR838
full_title: Local Civil Rule 83.8. Court-Annexed Mediation (Eastern District Only) [formerly Local Civil Rule 83.11]
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 83.8
rule_title: Court-Annexed Mediation (Eastern District Only)
---

(a) __Description.__ Mediation is a process in which parties and counsel agree to meet with a
neutral mediator trained to assist them in settling disputes. The mediator improves communication
across party lines, helps parties articulate their interests and understand those of the other party,
probes the strengths and weaknesses of each party's legal positions, and identifies areas of agreement
and helps generate options for a mutually agreeable resolution to the dispute. In all cases, mediation
provides an opportunity to explore a wide range of potential solutions and to address interests that
may be outside the scope of the stated controversy or which could not be addressed by judicial
action. A hallmark of mediation is its capacity to expand traditional settlement discussions and
broaden resolution options, often by exploring litigant needs and interests that may be formally
independent of the legal issues in controversy.

(b) __Mediation Procedures.__

  * (1) Eligible cases. Judges and Magistrate Judges may designate civil cases for
inclusion in the mediation program, and when doing so shall prepare an order to that effect.
Alternatively, and subject to the availability of qualified mediators, the parties may consent to
participation in the mediation program by preparing and executing a stipulation signed by all
parties to the action and so-ordered by the Court.
    * (A) Mediation deadline. Any court order designating a case for inclusion in the
mediation program, however arrived at, may contain a deadline not to exceed six
months from the date of entry on the docket of that order. This deadline may be
extended upon motion to the Court for good cause shown.
  * (2) Mediators. Parties whose case has been designated for inclusion in the
mediation program shall be offered the options of (a) using a mediator from the Court's
panel, a listing of which is available in the Clerk's Office; (b) selecting a mediator on their
own; or (c) seeking the assistance of a reputable neutral ADR organization in the selection of 
a mediator.
    * (A) Court's panel of mediators. When the parties opt to use a mediator
from the Court's panel, the Clerk's Office will appoint a mediator to handle the case
who (i) has been for at least five years a member of the bar of a state or the District of
Columbia; (ii) is admitted to practice before this Court; and (iii) has completed the
Court's requirements for mediator training and mediator expertise. If any party so
requests, the appointed mediator also shall have expertise in the area of law in the
case. The Clerk's Office will provide notice of their appointment to all counsel.
    * (B) Disqualification. Any party may submit a written request to the Clerk's
Office within fourteen days from the date of the notification of the mediator for the
disqualification of the mediator for bias or prejudice as provided in 28 U.S.C. ยง 144.
A denial of such a request by the Clerk's Office is subject to review by the assigned 
Judge upon motion filed within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Clerk's Office
denial.
  * (3) Scheduling the mediation. The mediator, however chosen, will contact all
attorneys to fix the date and place of the first mediation session, which shall be held within
thirty days of the date the mediator was appointed or at such other time as the Court may
establish.
    * (A) The Clerk's Office will provide counsel with copies of the Judge's order
referring the case to the mediation program, the Clerk's Office notice of appointment
of mediator (if applicable), and a copy of the program procedures.
  * (4) Written mediation statements. No less than fourteen (14) days prior to the first
mediation session, each party shall submit directly to the mediator a mediation statement not
to exceed ten pages double-spaced, not including exhibits, outlining the key facts and legal
issues in the case. The statement will also include a description of motions filed and their
status, and any other information that will advance settlement prospects or make the
mediation more productive. Mediation statements are not briefs and are not filed with the
Court, nor shall the assigned Judge or Magistrate Judge have access to them.
  * (5) Mediation session(s). The mediator meets initially with all parties to the dispute
and their counsel in a joint session. The mediator may hold mediation sessions in his/her
office, or at the Court, or at such other place as the parties and the mediator shall agree. At
this meeting, the mediator explains the mediation process and gives each party an opportunity
to explain his or her views about the matters in dispute. There is then likely to be discussion 
and questioning among the parties as well as between the mediator and the parties.
    * (A) Separate caucuses. At the conclusion of the joint session, the mediator
will typically caucus individually with each party. Caucuses permit the mediator and
the parties to explore more fully the needs and interests underlying the stated
positions. In caucuses the mediator strives to facilitate settlement on matters in
dispute and the possibilities for settlement. In some cases the mediator may offer
specific suggestions for settlement; in other cases the mediator may help the parties
generate creative settlement proposals.
    * (B) Additional sessions. The mediator may conduct additional joint sessions
to promote further direct discussion between the parties, or she/he may continue to
work with the parties in private caucuses.
    * (C) Conclusion. The mediation concludes when the parties reach a mutually
acceptable resolution, when the parties fail to reach an agreement, on the date the
Judge or Magistrate Judge specified as the mediation deadline in their designation
order, or in the event no such date has been specified by the Court, at such other time
as the parties and/or the mediator may determine. The mediator has no power to
impose settlement and the mediation process is confidential, whether or not a
settlement is reached.
  * (6) Settlement. If settlement is reached, in whole or in part, the agreement, which
shall be binding upon all parties, will be put into writing and counsel will file a stipulation of
dismissal or such other document as may be appropriate. If the case does not settle, the
mediator will immediately notify the Clerk's Office, and the case or the portion of the case 
that has not settled will continue in the litigation process.

(c) __Attendance at Mediation Sessions.__

  * (1) In all civil cases designated by the Court for inclusion in the mediation program,
attendance at one mediation session shall be mandatory; thereafter, attendance shall be
voluntary. The Court requires of each party that the attorney who has primary responsibility
for handling the trial of the matter attend the mediation sessions.
  * (2) In addition, the Court may require, and if it does not, the mediator may require
the attendance at the mediation session of a party or its representative in the case of a
business or governmental entity or a minor, with authority to settle the matter and to bind the
party. This requirement reflects the Court's view that the principal values of mediation
include affording litigants with an opportunity to articulate their positions and interests
directly to the other parties and to a mediator and to hear, first hand, the other party's version
of the matters in dispute. Mediation also enables parties to search directly with the other party for mutually
agreeable solutions.

(d) __Confidentiality.__

  * (1) The parties will be asked to sign an agreement of confidentiality at the beginning
of the first mediation session to the following effect:
    * (A) Unless the parties otherwise agree, all written and oral communications
made by the parties and the mediator in connection with or during any mediation
session are confidential and may not be disclosed or used for any purpose unrelated
to the mediation.
    * (B) The mediator shall not be called by any party as a witness in any court
proceeding related to the subject matter of the mediation unless related to the alleged
misconduct of the mediator.
  * (2) Mediators will maintain the confidentiality of all information provided to, or
discussed with, them. The Clerk of Court and the ADR Administrator are responsible for
program administration, evaluation, and liaison between the mediators and the Court and will
maintain strict confidentiality.
  * (3) No papers generated by the mediation process will be included in Court files, nor
shall the Judge or Magistrate Judge assigned to the case have access to them. Information
about what transpires during mediation sessions will not at any time be made known to the
Court, except to the extent required to resolve issues of noncompliance with the mediation
procedures. However, communications made in connection with or during a mediation may
be disclosed if all parties and, if appropriate as determined by the mediator, the mediator so
agree. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit parties from entering into
written agreements resolving some or all of the case or entering and filing with the Court
procedural or factual stipulations based on suggestions or agreements made in connection 
with a mediation.

(e) __Oath and Disqualification of Mediator.__

  * (1) Each individual certified as a mediator shall take the oath or affirmation
prescribed by 28 U.S.C. ยง 453 before serving as a mediator.
  * (2) No mediator may serve in any matter in violation of the standards set forth in 28
U.S.C. ยง 455. If a mediator is concerned that a circumstance covered by subparagraph (a) of
that section might exist, e.g., if the mediator's law firm has represented one or more of the
parties, or if one of the lawyers who would appear before the mediator at the mediation
session is involved in a case on which an attorney in the mediator's firm is working, the
mediator shall promptly disclose that circumstance to all counsel in writing. A party who
believes that the assigned mediator has a conflict of interest shall bring this concern to the 
attention of the Clerk's Office in writing, within fourteen (14) days of learning the source of
the potential conflict or the objection to such a potential conflict shall be deemed to have
been waived. Any objections that cannot be resolved by the parties in consultation with the
Clerk's Office shall be referred to the Judge or Magistrate Judge who has designated the case
for inclusion in the mediation program.
  * (3) A party who believes that the assigned mediator has engaged in misconduct in
such capacity shall bring this concern to the attention of the Clerk's Office in writing, within
fourteen (14) days of learning of the alleged misconduct or the objection to such alleged
misconduct shall be deemed to have been waived. Any objections that cannot be resolved
by the parties in consultation with the Clerk's Office shall be referred to the Judge who has
designated the case for inclusion in the mediation program.

(f) __Services of the Mediators.__

  * (1) Participation by mediators in the program is on a voluntary basis. Each
mediator shall receive a fee of $600 for the first four hours or less of the actual mediation.
Time spent preparing for the mediation will not be compensated. Thereafter, the mediator
shall be compensated at the rate of $250 per hour. The mediator's fee shall be paid by the
parties to the mediation. Any party that is unable or unwilling to pay the fee may apply to
the referring judge for a waiver of the fee, with a right of appeal to the district judge in the
event the referral was made by a magistrate judge. Each member of the panel will be
required to mediate a maximum of two cases pro bono each year, if requested by the Court.
Attorneys serving on the Court's panel will be given credit for pro bono work.
  * (2) Appointment to the Court's panel is for a three year term, subject to renewal. A
panelist will not be expected to serve on more than two cases during any twelve month
period and will not be required to accept each assignment offered. Repeated rejection of
assignments will result in the attorney being dropped from the panel.

(g) __Immunity of the Mediators.__ Mediators shall be immune from liability or suit with
respect to their conduct as such to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law.