---
id: 839
abbr: LCVR839
full_title: Local Civil Rule 83.9. Alternative Dispute Resolution (Southern District Only) [formerly Local Civil Rule 83.12]
rule_number: Local Civil Rule 83.9
rule_title: Alternative Dispute Resolution (Southern District Only)
---

(a) __Definition__ Mediation is a form of alternative dispute resolution. In mediation, parties and
counsel meet, sometimes collectively and sometimes individually, with a neutral third party (the
mediator) who has been trained to facilitate confidential settlement discussions. The parties articulate
their respective positions and interests and generate options for a mutually agreeable resolution to the
dispute. The mediator assists the parties in reaching their own negotiated settlement by defining the
issues, probing and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of each party's legal positions, and
identifying areas of agreement and disagreement. The main benefits of mediation are that it can result
in an expeditious and less costly resolution of the litigation, and can produce creative solutions to
complex disputes often unavailable in traditional litigation.

(b) __Administration__

  * (1) The Mediation Supervisor, appointed by the Clerk of the Court, shall administer
the Court's mediation program. The Chief Judge shall appoint one or more District Judges or
Magistrate Judges to oversee the program.
  * (2) The Mediation Supervisor, in consultation with other Court personnel, shall
ensure that information about the Court's mediation program is available on the Court's
website which will be updated as needed.
  * (3) The mediation program shall be governed by the “Procedures of the Mediation
Program for the Southern District of New York,” which sets forth specific and more detailed
information regarding the mediation program, and which is available on the Court's official
website (w w w . n y s d . u s c o u r t s . g o v ) or from the Mediation Office.
  * (4) In no event is the scheduling of mediation to interfere with any scheduling order
of the Court. 

(c) __Consideration of Mediation__ In all civil cases eligible for mediation pursuant to
paragraph (d), each party shall consider the use of mediation and shall report to the assigned Judge at
the initial Rule 16(b) case management conference, or subsequently, whether the party believes
mediation may facilitate the resolution of the lawsuit. Judges are encouraged to note the availability of
the mediation program before, at, or after the initial Rule 16(b) case management conference.

(d) __Entry into the Program__

  * (1) All civil cases other than social security, habeas corpus, and tax cases are eligible
for mediation, whether assigned to Manhattan or White Plains.
  * (2) The Board of Judges may, by Administrative Order, direct that certain specified
categories of cases shall automatically be submitted to the mediation program. The assigned
District Judge or Magistrate Judge may issue a written order exempting a particular case with 
or without the request of the parties.
  * (3) For all other cases, the assigned District Judge or Magistrate Judge may determine
that a case is appropriate for mediation and may order that case to mediation, with or without
the consent of the parties, before, at, or after the initial Rule 16(b) case management
conference. Alternatively, the parties should notify the assigned Judge at any time of their
desire to mediate.