---
id: 003
abbr: LDBR003
full_title: Rule 3. Part I
rule_number: Rule 3
rule_title: Part I
---

(a) Establishment of Part I
Part I is established for hearing and determining certain emergency and miscellaneous matters
in civil and criminal cases. Judges shall choose assignment to Part I from an appropriate schedule,
in order of their seniority, for periods not to exceed three weeks in each year. The judge(s) assigned
full-time to White Plains do not sit in Part I in Manhattan. The assignment committee may, on
consent of the judges affected, change such assignments, if necessary, to meet the needs of the court.

Part I shall be open from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday except on holidays.
The judge presiding in Part I may fix such other times for any proceeding as necessary.

(b) Civil Proceedings in Part I
Civil matters other than emergencies shall be heard on Tuesdays at 10:00 a.m. Admissions
to the bar shall be heard on Tuesdays at 11:00 a.m. Naturalization proceedings shall be conducted
on Fridays at 11:00 a.m. The court does not hold naturalization proceedings in White Plains.

  * (i) Miscellaneous Civil Matters.
The judge presiding in Part I shall hear and determine all miscellaneous proceedings
in civil matters, such as applications for relief relating to orders and subpoenas of
administrative agencies and for subpoenas issued in this district for cases outside the district.
  * (ii) Civil Emergency Matters.
The Part I judge shall hear and determine all emergency matters in civil cases which
have been assigned to a judge when the assigned judge is absent or has expressly referred the
matter to Part I only when that judge is unavailable due to extraordinary circumstances. In
the absence of a judge at the White Plains Courthouse, emergency matters are heard in Part I
at the Manhattan Courthouse. Depending on the procedures the Part I judge deems the
more efficient, the Part I judge may either dispose of an emergency matter only to the extent 
necessary to meet the emergency, or, on consent of the assigned judge and notice to the clerk,
transfer the action to himself or herself for all further proceedings.
  * (iii) Subsequent Emergency Proceedings.
If a civil emergency matter is brought before the Part 1 judge and the judge concludes
that for lack of emergency or otherwise the proceeding should not be determined in Part I,
the party who brought the proceeding shall not present the same matter again to any other
Part I judge unless relevant circumstances have changed in the interim in which case the party
shall advise the judge of the prior proceedings and changed circumstances.
  * (iv) Modifications
When a modification or further action on a Part I determination is sought, it shall be referred
in the first instance to the judge who made the original determination even though that judge
is no longer sitting in Part I.

(c) Criminal Proceedings in Part I
The judge presiding in Part I shall:

  * (i) Hear and determine all emergency matters in criminal cases which have been
assigned to a judge when the assigned judge is absent or has expressly referred the matter to
Part I only when that judge is unavailable due to extraordinary circumstances. In the
absence of a judge at the White Plains Courthouse, emergency matters are heard in Part I at
the Manhattan Courthouse.
  * (ii) Hear and determine appeals from orders of a magistrate judge in cases
that have not yet been assigned to a district judge.