---
id: 006
abbr: LDBR006
full_title: Rule 6. Criminal Proceedings
rule_number: Rule 6
rule_title: Criminal Proceedings
---

(a) Indictments designated for Manhattan may be returned by the grand jury in open court to
the magistrate judge presiding in the criminal part. Indictments designated for White Plains may be
returned by the grand jury to the magistrate judge presiding in the White Plains Courthouse.

(b) Assignments.
In a criminal case, after an indictment has been returned by the Grand Jury or a notice has
been filed by the United States Attorney's Office of an intention to file an information upon the
defendant's waiver of indictment, the magistrate judge on duty will randomly draw from the criminal
wheel, in open court, the name of a judge to whom the case should be assigned for all purposes.
The notice to file an information upon the defendant's waiver of indictment shall be signed by the
Unites States Attorney's Office and by the defendant's attorney. Waiver of indictment cases will not
be assigned a criminal docket number until the waiver has been accepted by the assigned judge.
Sealed indictments will be assigned a criminal docket number upon filing, but a judge will not be
selected until such time that the indictment is unsealed.

(c) Arraignments.
The United States Attorney's Office will promptly contact the judge to whom the case is
assigned and request the scheduling of a pretrial conference at which the defendant will be arraigned.

(d) Waiver of Indictments.
When any person offers to waive indictment, the judge to whom the case has been assigned
will conduct such proceedings as may be required by law to establish that the waiver is both knowing
and voluntary before an information is filed. The judge shall then arraign the defendant. If the
defendant fails to waive indictment and is subsequently indicted on the same or similar charges, the
case shall be assigned by the clerk to the same judge to whom the original information was assigned.

(e) Assignment of Superseding Indictments and Informations.
A superseding indictment or information will be assigned to the same judge to whom the 
original indictment or information was assigned.

(f) This rule applies to Manhattan. The judges in the White Plains Courthouse will
continue to follow such procedures as they find convenient.