---
id: 009
abbr: LDBR009
full_title: Rule 9. Petitions for Collateral Relief from Convictions
rule_number: Rule 9
rule_title: Petitions for Collateral Relief from Convictions
---

(a) Federal Convictions.
When a motion for collateral relief under 28 U.S.C. ยง 2255 or an audita querellas is filed, it
shall be assigned for all further proceedings to the judge to whom the underlying case was assigned.
That judge may either act on the motion without responsive papers or advise the United States
attorney of the date(s) when responsive papers are due.

When a motion under Fed. R. Crim. P. 41(g) for the return of property seized in a criminal
case is filed, it shall be assigned for all further proceedings to the judge to whom the underlying case
was assigned. The judge may either act on the motion without responsive papers or advise the 
United States attorney of the date(s) when responsive papers are due. Rule 41(g) motions that are
filed after the related criminal case is closed, shall be opened as a new civil action, and all filings shall
be docketed therein.

If the judge to whom the underlying case was assigned is unable to entertain the motion, the
motion shall be assigned by lot, or to the Chief Judge where appropriate.

(b) State Convictions
When a pro se petition under 28 U.S.C. ยง 2254 for collateral relief from a state conviction is
filed, the Pro Se Office shall first ascertain whether the petition is properly filed and, if not, the Office
shall take proper steps to have it corrected. The Pro Se Office shall ascertain if the petition is related
to any prior application and, if so, send a memorandum to that judge pursuant to Rule 13 of these
Rules for a determination on relatedness. If there was a related case but the judge to whom that
case was assigned is unable or declines to entertain the petition, or if the petition is unrelated to any
prior application, the petition shall be assigned pursuant to Rule 21 of these Rules, or to the Chief
Judge where appropriate. 