---
id: 013
abbr: LDBR013
full_title: Rule 13. Related Cases
rule_number: Rule 13
rule_title: Related Cases
---

(a) Determination of Relatedness

  * (1) General Rule. Subject to the limitations set forth below, a civil case,
bankruptcy appeal, or motion to withdraw the bankruptcy reference will be deemed related to one or
more civil cases, appeals or motions when the interests of justice and efficiency will be served. In
determining relatedness, a judge will consider whether (A) the actions concern the same or
substantially similar parties, property, transactions or events; (B) there is substantial factual overlap; 
(C) the parties could be subjected to conflicting orders; and (D) whether absent a determination of
relatedness there would be a substantial duplication of effort and expense, delay, or undue burden on
the Court, parties or witnesses. Bankruptcy appeals are deemed related if they arise from the same
order or judgment of the bankruptcy court. Motions to withdraw the bankruptcy reference are
deemed related if they seek withdrawal with respect to all or part(s) of the same adversary proceeding.
Nothing in this Rule is intended to preclude parties from moving for consolidated proceedings under
Fed. R. Civ. P. 42.
  * (2) Limitations on General Rule. Notwithstanding paragraph (a)(1):
    * (A) Civil cases shall not be deemed related merely because they involve
common legal issues or the same parties.
    * (B) Other than cases subject to Rule 4(b) and actions seeking the
enforcement of a judgment or settlement in or of an earlier case, civil cases presumptively shall not
be deemed related unless both cases are pending before the Court (or the earlier case is on appeal).
    * (C) Criminal cases are not treated as related to civil cases. Criminal cases are
not treated as related to each other unless a motion is granted for a joint trial.
    * (D) Bankruptcy appeals and motions to withdraw the reference are not treated
as related merely because they arise from the same bankruptcy proceeding.

(b) Procedure in Regard to Cases Said to be Related

  * (1) Disclosure of contention of relatedness. When a civil case is filed or
removed or a bankruptcy appeal or motion to withdraw the reference of an adversary proceeding
from the bankruptcy court is filed, the person filing or removing shall disclose on form JSC44C any
contention of relatedness and shall file a Related Case Statement stating clearly and succinctly the
basis for the contention. A copy of the civil cover sheet and Related Case Statement shall be served
with the complaint, notice of removal, notice of appeal, or motion. Any party may contest a claim
of relatedness by any other in writing addressed to the judge having the case with the lowest docket 
number of all cases claimed to be related. However, the foregoing shall not delay the assignment
process or the operation of this Rule.
  * (2) Assignment of cases that are designated as related. A case, bankruptcy appeal,
or motion to withdraw the bankruptcy reference that is designated as related shall be forwarded to
the judge before whom the allegedly related case, appeal or motion having the lowest docket number
is or was pending, who shall decide whether to accept or reject the case. The decision of the judge
with the lowest docket number shall control unless the Assignment Committee determines otherwise,
applying the standards of relatedness set forth in this Rule. The judge with the lowest docket
number shall notify the Assignment Committee of his or her decision to accept or reject the case,
appeal or motion and provide the Committee with the Related Case Statement and any submission in
opposition to the contention that the cases are related. If the Assignment Committee does not
concur with the judge’s decision to accept the allegedly related case, appeal or motion, the matter
shall be assigned by the Clerk by random selection.
  * (3) Claims of relatedness by other parties. A party other than the one filing a
case, bankruptcy appeal or motion to withdraw the reference that contends its case is related to
another may so advise in writing the judge assigned in its case and request a transfer of its case to the
judge that the party contends has the related case with the lowest docket number. If the assigned
judge believes the case is related under paragraph (a), he or she shall refer the question to the judge
having the case with the lowest docket number. In the event the latter judge agrees, the case shall
be transferred to that judge unless the Assignment Committee disagrees.

(c) Other Matters

  * (1) Motions in civil and criminal cases to consolidate, or for a joint trial, are
regulated by the Federal Rules. A defendant in a criminal case may move on notice to have all of his
or her sentences in this district imposed by a single judge. All such motions shall be noticed for
hearing before the judge having the lowest docket number, with courtesy copies to be provided to the judge or judges having the cases with the higher docket numbers.