---
id: 018
abbr: LDBR018
full_title: Rule 18. Designation of White Plains Cases
rule_number: Rule 18
rule_title: Designation of White Plains Cases
---

(a) Civil.

At the time of filing, the plaintiff’s attorney shall designate on the civil cover sheet whether
the case should be assigned to White Plains or Manhattan in accordance with these rules.
A civil case shall be designated for assignment to White Plains if:

  * (i) The claim arose in whole or in major part in the Counties of Dutchess, Orange,
Putnam, Rockland, Sullivan and Westchester (the "Northern Counties") and at least one of
the parties resides in the Northern Counties; or
  * (ii) The claim arose in whole or in major part in the Northern Counties and none of
the parties resides in this District.
A civil case may also be designated for assignment to White Plains if:
  * (iii) The claim arose outside this district and at least some of the parties reside in the
Northern Counties; or
  * (iv) At least half of the parties reside in the Northern Counties.
All civil cases other than those specified in the foregoing paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv)
and social security and habeas corpus petitions brought under 28 U.S.C. §2241 which are assigned on
a district-wide basis shall be designated for assignment to Manhattan.

(b) Criminal.

The U.S. attorney designates on the criminal cover sheet that the case is to be assigned to
White Plains if the crime was allegedly committed in whole or predominant part in the Northern
Counties.
Defendants in any criminal case designated for White Plains may be arraigned at the White
Plains Courthouse before a magistrate judge or a district judge.
Bail applications in any case designated for White Plains may be heard before a magistrate 
judge at White Plains, or, if unavailable, before a judge in White Plains, or a magistrate judge in
Manhattan.