---
id: 501
abbr: LDBR501
full_title: Rule 50.1. Categories and Classification of Cases; Information on Cases and Parties
rule_number: Rule 50.1
rule_title: Categories and Classification of Cases; Information on Cases and Parties
---

(a) Categories of Cases.

Cases shall be divided into the following main categories:

  * (1) Civil.
    * (A) Regular.
    * (B) Multidistrict litigation.
    * (C) Patent.
  * (2) Criminal.
  * (3) Miscellaneous.

(b) Information Sheet.

The party filing the initial paper in a civil or criminal case shall complete and attach an
information sheet. The information sheet shall be placed in the case file.
Where it appears to the Court that the filing party's reasons for joinder of parties are not
apparent from the face of the complaint, the Clerk of Court is authorized to request a written
explanation consistent with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 19 and any other appropriate Federal
Rule. The response of the filing party will be docketed and a copy forwarded to the assigned 
udicial officer.

(c) Disclosure of Interested Parties.

To enable judges and magistrates to evaluate possible disqualification or recusal, counsel for a
private (nongovernmental) party shall submit at the time of initial pleading a certificate identifying
any corporate parent, subsidiaries, or affiliates of that party.

(d) Long Island Cases.

  * (1) A criminal case shall be designated a “Long Island case” if the crime was
allegedly committed wholly or in substantial part in Nassau or Suffolk County.
  * (2) A civil case shall be designated a Long Island case if:
    * a) the case has been removed to this Court from a New York State court
located in Nassau or Suffolk County, or
    * b) in any other case,
      * i) a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the
claim or claims occurred in Nassau or Suffolk County, or
      * ii) a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim or claims did not occur in the Eastern District of New York and the defendant (or a majority of the defendants if there is more than one) resides in Nassau or Suffolk County or, in an interpleader action, the claimant (or a majority of the claimants if there is more than one) resides in Nassau or Suffolk County. 

      For purposes of this rule, a corporation shall be considered a resident of the county in which it has the most significant contacts.
  * (3) As provided in 50.2(f) a party may move to designate a case as a Long Island
case or to cancel such designation on the grounds that such action will serve the convenience of the
parties and witnesses or is otherwise in the interests of justice.

(e) Miscellaneous Cases.

All matters that do not receive a civil or criminal docket number shall be given a miscellaneous docket
number and assigned as provided in 50.5 of these rules.

[Amended: September 9th, 2014]