---
id: 502
abbr: LDBR502
full_title: Rule 50.2. Assignment of Cases
rule_number: Rule 50.2
rule_title: Assignment of Cases
---

(a) Time of Assignment.

The clerk shall assign a civil case upon the filing of the initial pleading. In a criminal case
after an indictment is returned or after an information (including a juvenile information under
18 U.S.C. ยง 5032) or a motion to transfer under 18 U.S.C. ยง 5032 has been filed, the United States
Attorney shall refer the case to the clerk who shall then assign the case. The United States attorney
shall arrange with the judge to whom the case is assigned, or if that judge is absent or unavailable as
provided in 50.5, with the miscellaneous judge, to have the defendant arraigned and a plea entered as
promptly as practicable.

(b) Random Selection Procedure.

All cases shall be randomly assigned by the clerk or his designee in public view in one of the
clerk's offices in such a manner that each active judge shall receive as nearly as possible the same
number of cases, except as provided in paragraph (h) Where a party or his counsel requests prior to
selection that he or she be present at the selection, the clerk shall make reasonable efforts to comply
with the request. In Brooklyn civil cases a magistrate judge shall be drawn at the same time and in
the same manner as a judge. All Long Island civil cases shall be assigned to the Long Island
magistrate judge. The parties to any Long Island case assigned to a Brooklyn judge may stipulate
that the case be assigned to the Long Island magistrate judge, for pretrial purposes.

(c) Assignment of Civil Cases.

  * (1) There shall be separate Brooklyn and Long Island civil assignment wheels.
At least quarterly the Chief Judge shall fix the proportion of cases to be assigned to the Long Island
courthouses so as to distribute the civil cases relatively equally among all the active judges.
  * (2) There shall be separate patent assignment wheels for district judges and
magistrate judges. A district judge or magistrate judge not in the patent assignment wheel who
received a new patent case by random selection from the civil assignment wheel may elect, within
thirty (30) days of assignment for district judges and seven (7) days of assignment for magistrate
judges, to direct reassignment of the case. A new district or magistrate judge, or both, will then be
assigned by random selection from the appropriate patent assignment wheel(s).

(d) Assignment of Criminal Cases.

  * (1) There shall be a Brooklyn criminal and a Long Island criminal assignment wheel.
  * (2) There shall be a Brooklyn and Long Island criminal misdemeanor assignment
wheels for the random assignment of these matters to a magistrate.

(e) Place of Trial.

Except in emergencies a case shall be tried at the place to which it has been assigned.

(f) Objection.

Any objection by a party to designation of a judge or to place of trial shall be made by letter
or motion to the judge assigned

  * (1) in a criminal case, within fourteen (14) days from arraignment or from initial
notice of appearance, whichever is earlier; or
  * (2) in a civil case, within the time allowed to respond to the complaint.

(g) Special Cases.

  * (1) The miscellaneous judge shall send all narcotics addict commitment cases
involving "eligible individuals" as defined by 28 U.S.C. ยง 2901(g) to the clerk for assignment
as provided in paragraph (b).
  * (2) Pro se applications or claims by persons in custody shall be filed without
prepayment of fees upon receipt, prior to decision on their in forma pauperis petitions.
  * (3) Multidistrict litigation is to be assigned to the judge selected by the multidistrict
litigation panel; subject to reassignment by the Chief Judge of the Eastern District of New
York, according to the usual reassignment rules of the district, to adjust caseload distribution
in the interests of justice.

(h) Chief Judge; Senior Judges; Temporarily Overloaded Judges; Notice of Removal from Wheel.

The chief judge and each senior judge shall indicate from time to time to the clerk the
percentage of a full caseload that he or she elects to have assigned. The chief judge, with the
consent of a judge, may remove that judge from any wheel temporarily to reduce the number of
pending cases and prevent delay in the disposition of cases by a judge who is then overburdened by
cases or due to ill health. The chief judge shall return that judge to the wheel only on consent of the
judge. The clerk shall upon request inform any attorney or party of the identity of judges whose
names have been removed from a wheel.

(i) Visiting Judge.

The chief judge shall approve the assignment or transfer of cases to a visiting judge.

(j) Proceedings After Assignment.

All proceedings in a case after assignment shall be conducted by the assigned judge, except as
provided by these guidelines.

(k) Recusal.

A judge or magistrate judge may recuse himself or herself at any time in accordance with
U.S.C. ยง 455. This guideline takes precedence over any other guideline.

(l) Appeals-Assignment on Reversal or Remand.

  * (1) In a criminal case upon reversal of a judgment and a direction for retrial or
resentence, on receipt of the mandate of the appellate court the clerk shall randomly select a
different judge to preside over the case. Notwithstanding this provision the chief judge may
order the case assigned to the original presiding judge to avoid placing an excessive burden on
another judge.
  * (2) In a civil case upon reversal the case shall remain assigned to the judge who was
previously assigned, unless the chief judge or his designee orders otherwise.

[Amended: January 10th, 2012]