---
id: 5031
abbr: LDBR5031
full_title: Rule 50.3.1. Related Civil Cases
rule_number: Rule 50.3.1
rule_title: Related Civil Cases
---

(a) __“Related” Civil Case Defined.__ A civil case is “related” to another civil case for
purposes of this guideline when, because of the similarity of facts and legal issues or because the
cases arise from the same transactions or events, a substantial saving of judicial resources is likely to
result from assigning both cases to the same judge and magistrate judge.

(b) __Civil Cases Not Deemed “Related”.__ A civil case shall not be deemed “related” to
another civil case merely because the civil case: (A) involves identical legal issues, or (B) involves the 
same parties.

(c) __Civil Cases Presumptively Not “Related”: Unless Both Cases Are Still Pending.__

Presumptively, and subject to the power of a judge to determine otherwise pursuant to
paragraph (d), civil cases shall not be deemed to be “related” unless both cases are still pending
before the court.

(d) __Judicial Determination That Civil Cases Are “Related”.__ Except for the cases
described in the final sentence of paragraph (e), all civil cases shall be randomly assigned when they
are filed. Other than the cases described in the final sentence of paragraph (e), civil cases shall not
be deemed to be “related” for purposes of this guideline at the instance of any litigant or attorney
unless and until there has been a determination by a judge of this court that the standard of
paragraph (a) is met, i.e., that because of the similarity of facts and legal issues or because the cases
arise from the same transactions or events, a substantial saving of judicial resources is likely to result
from assigning both cases to the same judge and magistrate judge. Any party may apply for such a
determination by filing with the clerk a letter of no more than three single-spaced pages explaining
why the standard of paragraph (a) is met and serving copies of the letter on all other parties. Such
an application must be made after the date when at least a majority of the defendants have been
served with the complaint, but not more than 30 days after that date unless the judge passing on the
application permits a later filing for good cause shown. Before making such an application, the
applicant must confer in good faith with all other parties in an effort to reach an agreement on
whether or not the case is “related”. After such an application is made, any other party may serve
and file within seven (7) days a letter of no more than three single-spaced pages supporting or
opposing the application. Any determination by a judge of this court that the standard of paragraph
(a) is or is not met shall be made by a judge or judges designated by the chief judge, who shall not
include the judge to whom the case has been randomly assigned or the judge to whom the case will 
be assigned if it is determined to be “related”.

(e) __Assignment of Related Cases.__ Cases which have been judicially determined to
be related shall be assigned by the clerk to the judge to whom was assigned the case with the lowest
docket number in the series of related cases. The clerk shall advise the judge of such assignment of
a related case. In the interest of judicial economy, the following categories of civil cases shall be
deemed to be “related” without further order of the court: (1) all habeas corpus petitions filed by the
same petitioner; (2) all pro se civil actions filed by the same individual; and (3) any other
subject-matter category of cases where the chief judge finds that the standard of paragraph (a) is met.

(f) __No Vested Rights.__ As stated in the Introduction to these Division of Business
Rules, this rule is adopted for the internal management of the case load of the court and shall not be
deemed to vest any rights in litigants or their attorneys and shall be subject to such amendments from
time to time as shall be approved by the court. This rule shall not be deemed to prevent the
reassignment of cases at the initiative of and by agreement of the judges involved.

[Amended: September 22, 2008]