---
id: 5032
abbr: LDBR5032
full_title: Rule 50.3.2. Related Criminal Cases
rule_number: Rule 50.3.2
rule_title: Related Criminal Cases
---

(a) __In General__

  * (1) For purposes of this rule, a “case” refers to a criminal proceeding commenced
by indictment or information. It does not include wiretap applications, motions in connection
with grand jury proceedings, or ex parte motions made outside of a proceeding commenced
by indictment or information.
  * (2) All criminal cases shall be randomly assigned upon filing.
  * (3) This rule shall not be deemed to prevent the reassignment of cases at the
initiative of and by agreement of the judges involved.
  * (4) As stated in the Introduction to these Division of Business Rules, this rule is 
adopted for the internal management of the case load of the court and shall not be deemed to
vest any rights in litigants or their attorneys and shall be subject to such amendments from
time to time as shall be approved by the court.

(b) __Relevant Considerations in Relating Cases__

  * (1) There shall be a presumption that one case is “related” to another when the
facts of each arise out of the same charged criminal scheme(s), transaction(s), or event(s),
even if different defendants are involved in each case.
  * (2) The presumption shall be overcome upon a determination by the relevant
judges that reassignment would not achieve a significant savings of judicial resources or serve
the interests of justice.
  * (3) In a case involving racketeering charges, the determination of whether that
case should be related to another shall be made on the basis of the predicate acts charged, not
the criminal enterprise.
  * (4) If a defendant has been convicted in more than one case and the sentences
are pending before different judges, each of the pending sentences shall be imposed by a
single judge determined by all of the relevant judges to be best suited to do so.

(c) __Obligation of the United States Attorney’s Office__

  * (1) It is the affirmative obligation of the United States Attorney’s Office
(“USAO”) to give notice to all relevant judges whenever it appears that one case may be
presumptively related to another pursuant to Section (b)(1). Such notice shall be by letter and
filed together with the indictment, information or Federal Criminal Rule 7(b) motion and
addressed to each of the judges concerned. The letter shall set forth the facts relevant to
deciding whether the indictment or information should be related to another case. The letter
shall in addition state clearly whether its purpose is solely to provide notice to the Court
under this rule, or whether the USAO seeks reassignment.
  * (2) The USAO may move for leave to file a notice required by the rule ex parte
and under seal for good cause shown. The USAO shall promptly move to unseal the notice
once the need for ex parte and sealed filing no longer exists. Absent leave of court, the USAO
shall publicly file a notice indicating that an ex parte sealed filing pursuant to this rule is being
submitted.
  * (3) These obligations are continuing. The USAO should endeavor to provide
notice that could avoid having two or more judges sentence different defendants or the same
defendant in related cases.

(d) __Input from Defendants__

Any defendant may request reassignment to a judge whom the defendant contends
has a case that is presumptively related pursuant to Section (b)(1). In addition, any defendant
may request that a case previously assigned to a judge as related be reassigned to the original
judge on the ground that it was not properly related. Such requests shall be made by filed
letter in both cases, addressed to both judges.

(e) __Joint Application for Reassignment__

Nothing in this rule shall preclude the USAO and defendant from jointly seeking
reassignment to another judge in the interests of justice or on the grounds that a significant
savings of judicial resources would be achieved. 