---
id: 505
abbr: LDBR505
full_title: Rule 50.5. Miscellaneous Judge and Duty Magistrate Judge
rule_number: Rule 50.5
rule_title: Miscellaneous Judge and Duty Magistrate Judge
---

(a) Duties and Functions of the Miscellaneous Judge

  * (1) All matters, including those requiring immediate action or brought as special proceedings
which cannot be assigned in the ordinary course, shall be randomly assigned pursuant to the
procedures set forth in 50.2(b) of these rules.
  * (2) The miscellaneous judge shall hear and determine matters requiring immediate action in
cases already assigned to any judge of the court, if that judge is unavailable or otherwise unable to hear
the matter only for such immediate emergency action. The matter or case will remain assigned to the
judge originally selected at random.
  * (3) The miscellaneous judge shall preside over admissions to the bar and naturalization
proceedings.

(b) Duties and Functions of the Duty Magistrate Judge

  * (1) Preside over the arraignment part;
  * (2) Empanel grand juries, receive indictments and enter presentment orders, refer criminal
cases to the clerk for assignment pursuant to 50.2, and discharge grand juries;
  * (3) Decide requests to be excused from service on the grand and petit juries; and
  * (4) Preside over admissions to the bar and naturalization proceedings when requested.

(c) Limitation of Duties in Matters Already Assigned.

The miscellaneous judge shall dispose of matters under paragraph (a)(2) only to the extent necessary
and shall continue the case before the assigned judge. All applications for emergency action or relief
shall disclose any prior application to a judge for the same or related relief and the outcome thereof.